So factor is a special type of vector,
which is used to create,
to represent categorical data.
So, and there's two types of factor,
there is unordered or ordered, so
you can think of this as being,
as storing data that are.
Have labels that are categorical but
have no ordering, so for
example male and female.
Or you can have ordered factors which
might represent things that are ranked.
So they have an order but they're
not numerical for example you know,
in many universities you'll have assistant
professors, associates professors, and
full professors.
Those are categorical but they're ordered.
So one, you can think of a factor
as an integer vector where
each integer has a label.
So for example, you might, you can think
of it as a vector as one two three,
where one represents you know,
high, for example high value and
two represents a medium value and
three represents a low value.
So you might have a, a variable
that's called high, medium and low.
And underlying in R is represented
by the numbers one, two, and three.
so, factors are important because they're
treated specially by modeling functions
like lm and
glm which we'll talk about later.
But these are functions for,
for, for fitting linear models.
And factors are with labels generally
speaking are better than using
simple integer vectors because the factors
are, what are called self describing.
So having a variable that has
values male and female is more
descriptive than having a variable that
just, that just has ones and twos.
So for example,
in many data sets you'll find that a var,
there will be a variable that's coded
as one and two and it's, and it's not.
Easy to know whether that variable is
really a numeric variable that only
takes values one and two, but the problem
is that's not something that's coded in
the data set, so it's hard to tell.
If you use a factor variable then
the coding for the labels is all,
is kind of built into the variable and
it's much easier to understand.
So factors can be created
with the factor function, and
the input into the factor
function is a character vector.
So here, I'm just creating a simple factor
with the which has what, two levels, and
the levels are yes and no.
And so x is a factor, you can see what,
it prints out a little bit
differently from a character vector,
in the sense that it prints up the value,
yes, yes, no, yes, no.
And then it has a separate attribute
which is called the levels.
And so the levels of this
factor are no and yes, okay.
So there's only two levels.
I can, I can call table on this factor and
it will give me a frequency count of
how many of each level there are.
So for example,
it'll tell me there are two nodes.
And there's three yeses.
Now, the un-class function strips
out the class for fa, for a vector.
So for example, I can,
if I call un-class on x it'll,
it'll kind of bring it down to an integer
vector, and you can see that underlying.
The factors represent as 22121 so,
yes, it's coded as two and
no, it's coded as one.
Now it's not really essential for
you to know this because you can
just treat the factor as being a vector of
yeses and nos but it's used sometimes it's
it's useful just to know under, underneath
kind of how factors are represented by R.
And so you see, it's really
an integer vector with the attribute,
the levels attribute of no and yes.
The order of the levels in the factor,
can be set using the levels
argument in factors.
So for ex, and sometimes this is important
because in modeling functions and
when you include a factor variable this,
this,
sometimes it's important to know
what the baseline level is.
And so the baseline level is just
the first level in the factor, and
the way this is determined
by NR is critical.
It's determined using alphabetical order,
so for
example, if I create a factor variable.
With the, with the elements yes and
no, then the base line level with be
the first level that's encountered and
because no comes before yes in
the alphabet then no will be the base line
level and yes will be the second level.
Now this may not be something
that you want you might want for
example a yes to be
the base line level and
no to be the second level and then in
that case you have explicitly tell r.
That yes is going to
be the first level and
you can view that using the levels
argument to the factor function.
So now when I print out the x object you
see that the elements are still the same,
still yes yes no, yes no.
But the levels attribute is reversed.
because yes is the first level and
no is the second level.